Ethan Fremder
Honors Project - README file
CMSE202 Section 4


Running the Code:

Run the code from top to bottom and it will work correctly. There is nothing special about how you should run it.



Abstract:

The goal of this project was to see how different precautions and different population densities impact the spread of Covid-19. From the results, I wanted to suggest the best possible combination that would allow for a gathering with the least spread possible. By using an Agent Based Model (ABM), I was able to visualize the spread and record each simulation without using actual people to test it on. Although it is not completely scientifically accurate, it gives a general idea of how Covid-19 reacts without putting anyone at risk. While creating the ABM, I used a 2D numpy array with values from zero to three where zero was an empty space, one was a person, two was an infected person, and three was a person whose precaution worked. I translated that array to a get visual representation of the room using matplotlib. In order to update the array, I created an update function that took in neighbor values and precaution success rates to determine what each index value would be in the new array. After completing the update functin, the model was ready to run. It took me a little while to figure out how I wanted to record the results with enough datapoints to analyze. Eventully I decided to run a for loop that added the amount of people infected to a list. I did this for different precautions and densities. I took all of the lists and added them to a dataframe to do analysis. I used matplotlib again to visualize the model results and found some interesting things. The main takeaway is that the lower the population percentage, the less Covid spread. Another key result was that vaccines work the best in reducing the spread with social distancing coming in second and masks being the least effective. Each precaution worked in comparison to the model with no precautions but vaccines were clearly the best precaution. These results make sense in regard to the numbers and statistics that were behind the scenes. Based on the CDC findings, vaccines had the largest percent effectiveness at 54% so it checks out that they slowed the spread the most. Masks were the least effective at 44% so it also makes sense that they didn't slow the spread as well as the other two precuations when applied to the model. When it comes to population density, it makes sense that the smaller populations result in the less infections. When there are less people in the room, the amount of 'neighbors' each person has is less than in a larger populated room. This would result in less spreading. The project results are quite helpful to someone who is planning an event but does not want to risk an outbreak. Obviously utilizing every precaution would be the smartest plan but if one had to choose a singular precaution, the results would suggest to have everyone vaccinated because the vaccinated group had the least spread among each precaution. When it comes to how many people should be invited, the less people leads to less infections. To allow the most amount of people with the least spread, the results suggest to keep it on the smaller side with ~70% population in the room as there is a smaller amount of spread there in comparison to the rest of the populations.
